Explain how to add an extension module (#1350)
python/devguide: developer-workflow/extension-modules.rst

> Standard library extension modules
> ==================================

Reviewer: Titles should follow this guidelines: https://devguide.python.org/documentation/markup/#sections

```suggestion
==================================
Standard library extension modules
==================================
```

In addition, depending on the differences between "CPython extensions" and "extensions module" (see my other comment), you might want to have a section for each, with the one for "CPython extensions" only having a short paragraph and a list of links.  If there is no meaningful difference, one of the top-levels of the page could be removed.  For reference, this is the current structure of the page:
```
Standard library extension modules
    Adding an extension module to CPython
        Make the CPython project compile
        Compile the CPython project
        Troubleshooting
            make regen-configure does not work!
```

Author: I should have read the style guide beforehand... 

>  If there is no meaningful difference, one of the top-levels of the page could be removed.

For me, there is none. Unless you want to make the distinction between "CPython extension" for the extensions part of the CPython project only.

Ideally, I'd like to have the following sections:

```text
Standard library extension modules
    Adding an extension module to CPython
        Make the CPython project compile
        Compile the CPython project
        Troubleshooting
            make regen-configure does not work!

    Adding a frozen module to CPython
        Make the CPython project compile
        Compile the CPython project
        Troubleshooting

	Adding a configuration value to CPython (like Py_HAVE_C_COMPLEX)
``` 

The assumptions on frozen modules are distinct and I also wanted to add something about how to add configuration values. For me "Standard library extension modules" referred to the CPython project itself and how to extend the C implementation itself (whatever is in Modules/ (maybe Objects/ and Include/) but not in Lib/).

The section "Adding to the stdlib" only focuses on the process but not how to make the project work after (like where to propose things, etc but not the technical aspects). There is also a separte page for the Python C API but I think it's also something separate (I mean, you cannot change the C API with new files if you don't know how to...).

Author: Btw, the title already has '===' above. It's just that GitHub didn't show it in the diff =/

Reviewer: > Btw, the title already has '===' above. It's just that GitHub didn't show it in the diff =/

My bad, I didn't notice there were a few more lines above.  I removed the suggestion now.

Also no worries about the style guide -- that's what reviewers are for :)

Regarding the distinction between "CPython extensions" and "extension modules", we should hear from someone that is more familiar with those (@ncoghlan, @matrixise?).  The rest of your plan sounds good to me.

Author: Actually, by digging into the issue I mentioned (missing the configure/bootstrap) I am now confused about the terminology. I *think* the accelerator modules are actually referred to as *built-in modules* and some other modules such as blake2 are *extension* modules.

Also, it's still unclear to me which files must be manually edited and which ones need to be autogenerated. AFAIK, I managed to make my PR https://github.com/python/cpython/pull/121446 work but I'm pretty sure that this is perhaps not the way to go :') So I would be very happy if someone could tell me the *exact* steps to do (the solution I propose should work but it's probably not the best one?)

Author: Update: frozen modules are actually written in Python, so they wouldn't be part of this tutorial although incoporating them into CPython is done at the C level.

In this section, we could explain how to write a CPython extension with the
C language, but the topic can take a complete book. We will however explain
how to add a new extension module to the standard library, for instance, a

> module responsible for accelerating some parts of the library.

Author: The current sentence is "In this section, we could explain how to write a CPython extension with the C language, but the topic can take a complete book." so I assumed that "CPython extension" designated whatever extension you added to Python (like a plugin) whether it's in C or C++, internally (committed to main) or externally (linked against `libpython` and discoverable if you provide the .so/.dll files).

The name of the page is "Standard library extension modules" so I used the terminology "module" to be consistent and to highlight that the components are in a "module" file/folderr placed in `Modules/`. 

I just made a quick search and didn't find a lot of occurrences of "CPython extensions" but a lot of "extension module". So maybe it's better to remove "CPython extension" and just use the term "extension module" (because there are also C++ extension modules).

For writing a CPython extension itself, we prefer to give you some links
where you can read good documentation:

* https://docs.python.org/dev/c-api/
* https://docs.python.org/dev/extending/
* :pep:`399`
* https://pythonextensionpatterns.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

> Adding an extension module to CPython
> -------------------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Adding an extension module to CPython
=====================================
```

       PyModuleDef_HEAD_INIT,
       .m_name = "_foo",                  // name to use in 'import' statements
       .m_doc = "some doc",               // or NULL if not needed
       .m_size = sizeof(foomodule_state),
       .m_methods = foomodule_methods,
       .m_slots = foomodule_slots,
       .m_traverse = foomodule_traverse,  // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_clear = foomodule_clear,        // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_free = foomodule_free,          // or NULL if the state is trivial
   };

   PyMODINIT_FUNC
   PyInit_foo(void)
   {
       return PyModuleDef_Init(&_foomodule);
   }

In a separate file, we would have the implementation of ``_Py_fast_bar``:

.. code-block:: c

   // Modules/foo/helper.c

   #include "foomodule.h"

   PyObject *_Py_fast_bar() {
       return PyUnicode_FromString("Hello World!");
   }

.. tip::

   Do not forget that symbols exported by ``libpython`` must start
   with ``Py`` or ``_Py``, which is verified via ``make smelly``.

One could imagine having more ``.h`` files, or no ``helper.c`` file if it is
not needed. Here, we wanted to illustrate a simple example without making it
too trivial.

> Make the CPython project compile
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make the CPython project compile
--------------------------------
```

  the ``<ItemGroup>`` containing the other ``..\Modules\*.h`` files:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <ClInclude Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.h" />

  In addition, add the following lines to the ``<ItemGroup>``
  containing the the other ``..\Modules\*.c`` files:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.c" />
     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\helper.c" />

- Open :cpy-file:`PCbuild/pythoncore.vcxproj.filters` and add the following line to
  the ``ItemGroup`` containing the the other ``..\Modules\*.h`` files:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <ClInclude Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.h">
         <Filter>Modules\foo</Filter>
     </ClInclude>

  In addition, add the following lines to the ``ItemGroup`` containing
  the the other ``..\Modules\*.c`` files:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.c">
       <Filter>Modules\foo</Filter>
     </ClCompile>
     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\helper.c">
       <Filter>Modules\foo</Filter>
     </ClCompile>

Observe that ``.h`` files use ``<ClInclude ...>`` whereas ``.c`` files
use ``<ClCompile ...>`` tags.

> Compile the CPython project
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Compile the CPython project
---------------------------
```

Now that everything is in place, it remains to compile the project:

.. code-block:: shell

   make regen-configure
   make regen-all
   make regen-stdlib-module-names

- The ``make regen-configure`` step regenerates the configure script.

- The ``make regen-all`` is responsible for running Arguments Clinic,
  regenerating global objects, etc. It is useful to run when you do not
  know which files should be updated.

- The ``regen-stdlib-module-names`` updates the standard module names,
  making ``_foo`` discoverable and importable via ``import _foo``.

You can now compile the entire project by running the following commands:

.. code-block:: shell

   ./configure --with-pydebug
   make

.. tip:: Use ``make -j12`` to speed-up compilation if you have enough CPU cores.

> Troubleshooting
> ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Troubleshooting
---------------
```

This section addresses common issues that you may face when following this tutorial.

> ``make regen-configure`` does not work!
> .......................................

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``make regen-configure`` does not work!
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
```

Standard library extension modules
==================================

In this section, we could explain how to write a CPython extension with the
C language, but the topic can take a complete book. We will however explain

> how to add a new extension module to the standard library, e.g., a module

Reviewer 2: Please avoid Latin abbreviations: https://devguide.python.org/documentation/style-guide/#use-simple-language

```suggestion
how to add a new extension module to the standard library, for example, a module
```

Author: I plead guilty. I didn't read the guidelines...

responsible for accelerating some parts of the library.

> For writing a CPython extension itself, we prefer to give you some links
> where you can read a very good documentation.
> 
> Read the following references:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For writing a CPython extension itself, we prefer to give you some links
where you can read good documentation:
```

* :pep:`399`
* https://pythonextensionpatterns.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

Adding an extension module to CPython
-------------------------------------

In this section, we assume that the extension module to be added
does not rely on external dependencies and is not a frozen module.

Let us assume that the standard library has the :mod:`!foo` module
which contains some function :func:`!foo.bar`:

.. code-block:: python

   def bar():
       return "Hello World!"

Instead of using the Python implementation of :func:`!foo.bar`, we want to
use its corresponding C implementation exposed as the :mod:`!_foo` module.
Ideally, we want to modify ``foo.py`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   try:
       # use the C implementation if possible
       from _foo import bar
   except ImportError:
       # fallback to the pure Python implementation
       def bar():
           return "Hello World!"

Some modules in the standard library are implemented both in C and in Python,
such as :mod:`decimal` or :mod:`io`, and the C implementation is expected
to improve performance when available (such modules are usually referred to as
*accelerator modules*). In our example, we need to:

> - determine where the extension module is to be placed;
> - determine which files to modify in order to compile the project;
> - determine which Makefile rules to invoke in the end.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- determine where to place the extension module;
- determine which files to modify in order to compile the project;
- determine which ``Makefile`` rules to invoke at the end.
```

       {Py_mod_exec, foomodule_exec}, // 'foomodule_exec' may be NULL if the state is trivial
       {Py_mod_multiple_interpreters, Py_MOD_PER_INTERPRETER_GIL_SUPPORTED},
       {Py_mod_gil, Py_MOD_GIL_NOT_USED},
       {0, NULL},
   };

   static struct PyModuleDef foomodule = {
       PyModuleDef_HEAD_INIT,
       .m_name = "_foo",                  // name to use in 'import' statements
       .m_doc = "some doc",               // or NULL if not needed
       .m_size = sizeof(foomodule_state),
       .m_methods = foomodule_methods,
       .m_slots = foomodule_slots,
       .m_traverse = foomodule_traverse,  // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_clear = foomodule_clear,        // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_free = foomodule_free,          // or NULL if the state is trivial
   };

   PyMODINIT_FUNC
   PyInit_foo(void)
   {
       return PyModuleDef_Init(&_foomodule);
   }

In a separate file, we would have the implementation of ``_Py_fast_bar``:

.. code-block:: c

   // Modules/foo/helper.c

   #include "foomodule.h"

   PyObject *_Py_fast_bar() {
       return PyUnicode_FromString("Hello World!");
   }

.. tip::

>    Do not forget that symbols exported by libpython must start
>    with "Py" or "_Py", which is verified via ``make smelly``.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Do not forget that symbols exported by ``libpython`` must start
   with ``Py`` or ``_Py``, which is verified via ``make smelly``.
```

     <ClInclude Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.h" />

  In addition, add the following lines to the ``<ItemGroup>``
  containing the the other ``..\Modules\*.c`` files:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.c" />
     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\helper.c" />

- Open :cpy-file:`PCbuild/pythoncore.vcxproj.filters` and add the following line to
  the ``ItemGroup`` containing the the other ``..\Modules\*.h`` files:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <ClInclude Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.h">
         <Filter>Modules\foo</Filter>
     </ClInclude>

  In addition, add the following lines to the ``ItemGroup`` containing
  the the other ``..\Modules\*.c`` files:

  .. code-block:: xml

     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\foomodule.c">
       <Filter>Modules\foo</Filter>
     </ClCompile>
     <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\foo\helper.c">
       <Filter>Modules\foo</Filter>
     </ClCompile>

Observe that ``.h`` files use ``<ClInclude ...>`` whereas ``.c`` files
use ``<ClCompile ...>`` tags.

Compile the CPython project
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Now that everything is in place, it remains to compile the project:

.. code-block:: shell

>    $ make regen-configure
>    $ make regen-all
>    $ make regen-stdlib-module-names

Reviewer 2: The copy button omits the dollar signs, but not when highlighting and manually copying.

```suggestion
   make regen-configure
   make regen-all
   make regen-stdlib-module-names
```

- The ``make regen-configure`` step regenerates the configure script.

- The ``make regen-all`` is responsible for running Arguments Clinic,
  regenerating global objects, etc. It is useful to run when you do not
  know which files should be updated.

- The ``regen-stdlib-module-names`` updates the standard module names,
  making ``_foo`` discoverable and importable via ``import _foo``.

You can now compile the entire project by running the following commands:

.. code-block:: shell

>    $ ./configure --with-pydebug
>    $ make

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   ./configure --with-pydebug
   make
```

> .. tip:: Use ``make -j12`` to speed-up the compilation if you have enough CPU cores.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. tip:: Use ``make -j12`` to speed-up compilation if you have enough CPU cores.
```

Troubleshooting
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This section addresses common issues that developers may face when following this tutorial.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section addresses common issues you may face when following this tutorial.
```

``make regen-configure`` does not work!
.......................................

Since this rule requires Docker to be running and a Docker instance,

> the following can be done on Linux platforms (systemctl-based):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the following can be done on Linux platforms (``systemctl``-based):
```

.. code-block:: shell

>    $ systemctl status docker        # is the docker service running?
>    $ sudo systemctl start docker    # start it if not!
>    $ sudo systemctl restart docker  # or restart it!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   systemctl status docker        # is the docker service running?
   sudo systemctl start docker    # start it if not!
   sudo systemctl restart docker  # or restart it!
```

> If Docker complains about missing permissions, the following StackOverflow post

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If Docker complains about missing permissions, this Stack Overflow post
```

where you can read good documentation:

* https://docs.python.org/dev/c-api/
* https://docs.python.org/dev/extending/
* :pep:`399`
* https://pythonextensionpatterns.readthedocs.io/en/latest/

Adding an extension module to CPython
=====================================

Assume that the standard library contains a pure Python module :mod:`!foo`
together with the following :func:`!foo.greet` function:

.. code-block:: python

   def greet():
       return "Hello World!"

Instead of using the Python implementation of :func:`!foo.greet`, we want to
use its corresponding C implementation exposed in some :mod:`!fastfoo` module
written in C. Ideally, we want to modify ``foo.py`` as follows:

.. code-block:: python

   try:
       # use the C implementation if possible
       from fastfoo import greet
   except ImportError:
       # fallback to the pure Python implementation
       def greet():
           return "Hello World!"

Some modules in the standard library are implemented both in C and in Python,
such as :mod:`decimal` or :mod:`itertools`, and the C implementation is expected
to improve performance when available (such modules are commonly referred

> to as *accelerator modules*). In our example, we need to determine:

Author: Oh thanks for the PEP tip, I wasn't aware of it! I think the introduction is the correct place to talk about them in their generality.

> to as *accelerator modules*). In our example, we need to determine:

Author: Update: actually, I said that `itertools` was both in C and Python but there is no Python implementation of itertools... Now, I use `datetime` and `pickle` as examples since they really have identical Python implementation.

  .. seealso:: :data:`sys.builtin_module_names` --- names of built-in modules.

* A *shared* (or *dynamic*) extension module is built as a shared library
  (``.so`` or ``.dll`` file) and is *dynamically* linked into the interpreter.

  In particular, the module's :attr:`__file__` attribute contains the path
  to the ``.so`` or ``.dll`` file.

.. note::

   Informally, built-in extension modules can be regarded as *required*
   while shared extension modules are *optional* in the sense that they
   might be supplied, overridden or disabled externally.

   Usually, accelerator modules are built as *shared* extension modules,
   especially if they already have a pure Python implementation.

According to :pep:`399`, *new* extension modules MUST provide a working and
tested pure Python implementation, unless a special dispensation is given.
Please ask the :github:`Steering Council <python/steering-council>` if such
dispensation is needed.

While new built-in extension modules could be considered exceptions to that
rule, shared extension modules must provide a Python implementation, not only
because of the guidelines, but also as a fallback if the corresponding shared

> library is not be present on the system.

Reviewer 3: I'd remove this paragraph, and leave the reasoning to the PEP.
The PEP says:
> Typically the exemption will be granted only when a module wraps a specific C-based library (e.g., [sqlite3](http://docs.python.org/py3k/library/sqlite3.html)).

That still holds. If `sqlite3` was being considered today, it probably wouldn't be added to stdlib at all, but if it would, it would be a shared extension without a Python implementation.

Reviewer 4: > [...] but if it would, it would be a shared extension without a Python implementation.

... which _is_ the case today; there is no Python implementation.

Reviewer 3: Yup.
Compare to something like `binascii`, which also doesn't have a Python implementation, but would absolutely need one if it was added today.

.. code-block:: shell

   make regen-configure
   ./configure
   make regen-all
   make regen-stdlib-module-names
   make

.. tip::

   Use ``make -j12`` to speed-up compilation if you have enough CPU cores.

* ``make regen-configure`` updates the :cpy-file:`configure` script.

* ``make regen-all`` is responsible for regenerating header files and
  invoking other scripts, such as :ref:`Argument Clinic <clinic>`.
  Execute this rule if you do not know which files should be updated.

* ``make regen-stdlib-module-names`` updates the standard module names, making
  :mod:`!fastfoo` discoverable and importable via ``import fastfoo``.

* The final ``make`` step is generally not needed since the previous ``make``
  invokations may completely rebuild the project, but it could be needed in
  some specific cases.

Troubleshooting
---------------

This section addresses common issues that you may face when following this tutorial.

No rule to make target ``regen-configure``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This usually happens after running ``make distclean`` (which removes
the ``Makefile``). The solution is to regenerate the :cpy-file:`configure`

> script as follows:

Reviewer 3: Or run `Tools/build/regen-configure.sh` directly.

Author: I thought about that, but I wanted to reduce the number of tools or rules I introduce. Also, if by any chance the Makefile is doing something else, at least, I wouldn't need to update that section. But I can mention it if you think it's better.

.. code-block:: shell

   ./configure            # for creating a Makefile
   make regen-configure   # for updating 'configure'
   ./configure            # for updating the Makefile

``make regen-configure`` and missing permissions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since this rule requires `Docker <https://docs.docker.com/desktop>`_ to be

> running, the following can be done on Linux platforms (``systemctl``-based):

Reviewer 3: Not sure if it's worth mentioning that instead of Docker you can use `podman`, which can be just installed, it doesn't need to be running.

Author: Well... I have no idea how to help people with podman :') but yes, I'll mention it as well. I'll have a look at it afterwards

  In particular, the module's :attr:`__file__` attribute contains the path
  to the ``.so`` or ``.dll`` file.

.. note::

   Informally, built-in extension modules can be regarded as *required*
   while shared extension modules are *optional* in the sense that they
   might be supplied, overridden or disabled externally.

   Usually, accelerator modules are built as *shared* extension modules,
   especially if they already have a pure Python implementation.

According to :pep:`399`, *new* extension modules MUST provide a working and
tested pure Python implementation, unless a special dispensation is given.
Please ask the :github:`Steering Council <python/steering-council>` if such
dispensation is needed.

Adding an extension module to CPython
=====================================

Assume that the standard library contains a pure Python module :mod:`!foo`
together with the following :func:`!foo.greet` function:

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: Lib/foo.py

   def greet():
       return "Hello World!"

Instead of using the Python implementation of :func:`!foo.greet`, we want to
use its corresponding C implementation exposed in some :mod:`!fastfoo` module

> written in C. Ideally, we want to modify ``foo.py`` as follows:

Author: Ah! I have a question on this one:

- in the implementation of the io module, we have 

```c
PyMODINIT_FUNC
PyInit__io(void)
{
    return PyModuleDef_Init(&_PyIO_Module);
}
```

However:

```c
struct PyModuleDef _PyIO_Module = {
    .m_base = PyModuleDef_HEAD_INIT,
    .m_name = "io",  // <-- it's "io" but not "_io"
    .m_doc = module_doc,
    .m_size = sizeof(_PyIO_State),
    .m_methods = module_methods,
    .m_traverse = iomodule_traverse,
    .m_clear = iomodule_clear,
    .m_free = iomodule_free,
    .m_slots = iomodule_slots,
};
```

I thought that the PyInit function should be suffixed with the same name as the one in "m_name" but it doesn't seem the case here. What I know is that there is an entry in the Setup.bootstrap.in that has `_io _iomodule/...` so I assume that the `_io` here is paired with `PyInit_*`.

As for those in Setup.stdlib.in, it's something like `
@MODULE_NAME_TRUE@name ...` and I assume that "NAME == name.upper()" and that "name" is the name of the module to be exported, right? or is it something else?

> written in C. Ideally, we want to modify ``foo.py`` as follows:

Author: Update: IIUC, the marker in Setup.stdlib.in or Setup.bootstrap.in is the one that should be matched against the `PyInit_*` function.

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: Lib/foo.py

   try:
       # use the C implementation if possible
       from fastfoo import greet
   except ImportError:
       # fallback to the pure Python implementation
       def greet():
           return "Hello World!"

In our example, we need to determine:

- where to place the extension module source code in the CPython project tree;
- which files to modify in order to compile the CPython project;
- which ``Makefile`` rules to invoke at the end.

Updating the CPython project tree
---------------------------------

Usually, accelerator modules are added in the :cpy-file:`Modules` directory of
the CPython project. If more than one file is needed for the extension module,
it is more convenient to create a sub-directory in :cpy-file:`Modules`.

For our extension module ``fastfoo``, we consider the following working tree:

> - :ref:`Modules/_foo/_foomodule.h` --- the extension module shared prototypes.

Author: I see. Because most of the modules that are not just a single .c files have a corresponding .h which has a bit of everything inside (almost all other modules have a single HUGE .c which makes it very hard to read in general). 

I'll change this one then!

- :ref:`Modules/_foo/_foomodule.c` --- the extension module implementation.
- :ref:`Modules/_foo/helper.c` --- the extension helpers implementation.

We deliberately named the working tree directory and files with names distinct
from the actual Python module to import (whether it is the pure Python module

> or its C implementation) to highlight the differences in configuration files.

Author: Here is what I suggest:

- I use different names for the directory tree and the C module (namely, `_foo` and `_fastfoo`).
- But I say that the convention is to prefix the Python module with `_` if it's an accelerator module and use the same name for the directory tree and for the arguments clinic input. Would it be fine like this?

Or should I just harmonize everything as if it were production code and don't tell people that they could actually change the names ? :D

       .m_methods = foomodule_methods,
       .m_slots = foomodule_slots,
       .m_traverse = foomodule_traverse,  // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_clear = foomodule_clear,        // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_free = foomodule_free,          // or NULL if the state is trivial
   };

   PyMODINIT_FUNC
   PyInit_fastfoo(void)
   {
       return PyModuleDef_Init(&foomodule);
   }

.. tip::

   Recall that the ``PyInit_<MODNAME>`` function must be suffixed by the *same*
   module name as that of :c:member:`PyModuleDef.m_name` (here, ``fastfoo``).
   Other identifiers such as those used in :ref:`Argument Clinic <clinic>`
   inputs do not have such naming requirements.

.. code-block:: c
   :caption: Modules/_foo/helper.c
   :name: Modules/_foo/helper.c

   #include "_foomodule.h"

   PyObject *_Py_greet_fast(void) {
       return PyUnicode_FromString("Hello World!");
   }

.. tip::

   Functions or data that do not need to be shared across different C source
   files should be declared ``static`` to avoid exporting their symbols from
   ``libpython``.

   If symbols need to be exported, their names must start with ``Py`` or

>    ``_Py``. This can be verified by ``make smelly``.

Reviewer 5: When discussing exporting symbols, reference https://devguide.python.org/developer-workflow/c-api/

     PY_STDLIB_MOD([fastfoo],
                   [test "$ac_sys_system" = "Linux"],
                   [test "$ARCH_RUN_32BIT" = "true"],
                   [-I\$(srcdir)/Modules/_foo], [])

  More generally, the status of the extension is determined as follows:

  +-----------+-----------------+----------+
  | Enabled   | Supported       | Status   |
  +===========+=================+==========+
  | true      | true            | yes      |
  +-----------+-----------------+----------+
  | true      | false           | missing  |
  +-----------+-----------------+----------+
  | false     | true or false   | disabled |
  +-----------+-----------------+----------+

  The extension status is ``n/a`` if the extension is marked unavailable
  by the ``PY_STDLIB_MOD_SET_NA`` macro. To mark an extension as unavailable,
  find the usages of ``PY_STDLIB_MOD_SET_NA`` in :cpy-file:`configure.ac` and
  add the following line:

  .. code-block:: text
     :caption: :cpy-file:`configure.ac`
     :emphasize-lines: 4

     dnl Modules that are not available on some platforms
     AS_CASE([$ac_sys_system],
         ...
         [PLATFORM_NAME], [PY_STDLIB_MOD_SET_NA([fastfoo])],
         ...
     )

> 

Reviewer 5: Likely worth stating explicitly that folks should look at the comments and existing modules in `configure.ac` for guidance on adding new external build dependencies for modules that need them.

Updating :cpy-file:`Makefile.pre.in`
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If needed, add the following line to the section for module dependencies:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: :cpy-file:`Makefile.pre.in`
   :emphasize-lines: 4

   ##########################################################################
   # Module dependencies and platform-specific files
   ...

>    MODULE_FASTFOO_DEPS=$(srcdir)/Modules/_foo/_foomodule.h

Reviewer 5: As per above comment `_foomodule.h` -> `helper.h`

   :emphasize-lines: 3

   *static*
   ...
   fastfoo _foo/_foomodule.c _foo/helper.c
   ...

For other extension modules, update :cpy-file:`Modules/Setup.stdlib.in`
by adding the following line after the ``*@MODULE_BUILDTYPE@*`` marker
but before the ``*shared*`` marker:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: :cpy-file:`Modules/Setup.stdlib.in`
   :emphasize-lines: 3

   *@MODULE_BUILDTYPE@*
   ...
   @MODULE_FASTFOO_TRUE@fastfoo _foo/_foomodule.c _foo/helper.c
   ...
   *shared*

The ``@MODULE_<NAME>_TRUE@<name>`` marker expects ``<NAME>`` to be the
upper-cased module name ``<name>``. If the extension module must be built
as a *shared* module, put the ``@MODULE_FASTFOO_TRUE@fastfoo`` line after
the ``*shared*`` marker:

.. code-block:: text
   :caption: :cpy-file:`Modules/Setup.stdlib.in`
   :emphasize-lines: 4

   ...
   *shared*
   ...
   @MODULE_FASTFOO_TRUE@fastfoo _foo/_foomodule.c _foo/helper.c

Compiling the CPython project
-----------------------------

Now that everything is in place, it remains to compile the project:

.. code-block:: shell

   make regen-configure
   ./configure
   make regen-all
   make regen-stdlib-module-names
   make

.. tip::

>    Use ``make -j12`` to speed-up compilation if you have enough CPU cores.

Author: Quick question but should I say ``make -j12``, ``make -j`` or ``make -j4``? There is an opened PR about this https://github.com/python/devguide/pull/1087 but I put 12 because I don't like to wait (also because I have 32 in total) but should I go for something like `-j8` instead (or even a more conservative `-j4`?)

Author: Recommending `-j` and `-jN` instead.

Standard library extension modules
==================================

> In this section, we are interested in extending the CPython project with
> an :term:`extension module`. We will not explain how to write the module
> in C but rather explain how to configure the project and make it compile.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In this section, we explain how to configure and compile the CPython project with
a C :term:`extension module`. We will not explain how to write a C extension module and
offer links to other documentation.
```

* A *built-in* extension module is a module built and shipped with
  the Python interpreter. A built-in module is *statically* linked
  into the interpreter, thereby lacking a :attr:`__file__` attribute.

  .. seealso:: :data:`sys.builtin_module_names` --- names of built-in modules.

  Built-in modules are built with the :c:macro:`!Py_BUILD_CORE_BUILTIN`
  macro defined.

* A *shared* (or *dynamic*) extension module is built as a shared library
  (``.so`` or ``.dll`` file) and is *dynamically* linked into the interpreter.

  In particular, the module's :attr:`__file__` attribute contains the path
  to the ``.so`` or ``.dll`` file.

  Shared modules are built with the :c:macro:`!Py_BUILD_CORE_MODULE`
  macro defined. Using the :c:macro:`!Py_BUILD_CORE_BUILTIN` macro
  instead causes an :exc:`ImportError` when importing the module.

.. note::

   Informally, built-in extension modules can be regarded as *required*
   while shared extension modules are *optional* in the sense that they
   might be supplied, overridden or disabled externally.

   Usually, accelerator modules are built as *shared* extension modules,
   especially if they already have a pure Python implementation.

> According to :pep:`399`, *new* extension modules MUST provide a working and
> tested pure Python implementation, unless a special dispensation is given.
> Please ask the :github:`Steering Council <python/steering-council>` if such
> dispensation is needed.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
According to :pep:`399`, *new* extension modules MUST provide a working and
tested pure Python implementation, unless a special dispensation from
the :github:`Steering Council <python/steering-council>` is given.
```

Adding an extension module to CPython
=====================================

Assume that the standard library contains a pure Python module :mod:`!foo`

> together with the following :func:`!foo.greet` function:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
with the following :func:`!foo.greet` function:
```

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: Lib/foo.py

   def greet():
       return "Hello World!"

> Instead of using the Python implementation of :func:`!foo.greet`, we want to
> use its corresponding C implementation exposed in some :mod:`!_foo` module
> written in C. Ideally, we want to modify :cpy-file:`!Lib/foo.py` as follows:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Instead of using the Python implementation of :func:`!foo.greet`, we want to
use its corresponding C extension implementation exposed in :mod:`!_foo` module.
Ideally, we want to modify :cpy-file:`!Lib/foo.py` as follows:
```

.. code-block:: python
   :caption: Lib/foo.py

   try:
       # use the C implementation if possible
       from _foo import greet
   except ImportError:
       # fallback to the pure Python implementation
       def greet():
           return "Hello World!"

.. note::

>    Accelerator modules should *never* be imported directly, whence the
>    convention is to mark them as private implementation details with the
>    underscore prefix (namely, :mod:`!_foo` in this example).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
   Accelerator modules should *never* be imported directly. The
   convention is to mark them as private implementation details with the
   underscore prefix (namely, :mod:`!_foo` in this example).
```

In order to incorporate the accelerator module, we need to determine:

> - where to place the extension module source code in the CPython project tree,
> - which files to modify in order to compile the CPython project, and
> - which ``Makefile`` rules to invoke at the end.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- where to update the CPython project tree with the extension module source code 
- which files to modify to configure and compile the CPython project, and
- which ``Makefile`` rules to invoke at the end.
```

Updating the CPython project tree
---------------------------------

> Usually, accelerator modules are added in the :cpy-file:`Modules` directory of
> the CPython project. If more than one file is needed for the extension module,
> it is more convenient to create a sub-directory in :cpy-file:`Modules`.
> 
> For our extension module :mod:`!_foo`, we consider the following working tree:
> 
> - :ref:`Modules/_foo/_foomodule.c` --- the extension module implementation.
> - :ref:`Modules/_foo/helper.h` --- the extension helpers declarations.
> - :ref:`Modules/_foo/helper.c` --- the extension helpers implementations.
> 
> By convention, the source file containing the extension module implementation
> is called ``<NAME>module.c``, where ``<NAME>`` is the name of the module that
> will be later imported (in our case :mod:`!_foo`). In addition, the directory
> containing the implementation should also be named similarly.
> 
> One could imagine having more files, or no helper files at all. Here,
> we wanted to illustrate a simple example without making it too trivial. If
> the extension module does not require additional files, it may directly be
> placed in :cpy-file:`Modules` as ``Modules/_foomodule.c``.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Usually, accelerator modules are added in the :cpy-file:`Modules` directory of
the CPython project. If more than one file is needed for the extension module,
it is more convenient to create a sub-directory in :cpy-file:`Modules`.

In the simplest example where the extension module is one file, it may be
placed in :cpy-file:`Modules` as ``Modules/_foomodule.c``.

For a non-trivial example of the extension module :mod:`!_foo`, we consider
the following working tree:

- :ref:`Modules/_foo/_foomodule.c` --- the extension module implementation.
- :ref:`Modules/_foo/helper.h` --- the extension helpers declarations.
- :ref:`Modules/_foo/helper.c` --- the extension helpers implementations.

By convention, the source file containing the extension module implementation
is called ``<NAME>module.c``, where ``<NAME>`` is the name of the module that
will be later imported (in our case :mod:`!_foo`). In addition, the directory
containing the implementation should also be named similarly.
```

       {Py_mod_multiple_interpreters, Py_MOD_PER_INTERPRETER_GIL_SUPPORTED},
       {Py_mod_gil, Py_MOD_GIL_NOT_USED},
       {0, NULL},
   };

   static struct PyModuleDef foomodule = {
       PyModuleDef_HEAD_INIT,
       .m_name = "_foo",
       .m_doc = "some doc",               // or NULL if not needed
       .m_size = sizeof(foomodule_state),
       .m_methods = foomodule_methods,
       .m_slots = foomodule_slots,
       .m_traverse = foomodule_traverse,  // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_clear = foomodule_clear,        // or NULL if the state is trivial
       .m_free = foomodule_free,          // or NULL if the state is trivial
   };

   PyMODINIT_FUNC
   PyInit__foo(void)
   {
       return PyModuleDef_Init(&foomodule);
   }

.. tip::

   Recall that the ``PyInit_<NAME>`` function must be suffixed by the
   module name ``<NAME>`` used in import statements (here ``_foo``),
   and which usually coincides with :c:member:`PyModuleDef.m_name`.

   Other identifiers such as those used in :ref:`Argument Clinic <clinic>`
   inputs do not have such naming requirements.

Configuring the CPython project
-------------------------------

> Now that we have implemented our extension module, we need to update some

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Now that we have added our extension module to the CPython source tree, we need to update some
```

     ...
     PY_STDLIB_MOD_SIMPLE([_foo], [-I\$(srcdir)/Modules/_foo], [])
     ...

  The ``PY_STDLIB_MOD_SIMPLE`` macro takes as arguments:

  * the module name ``<NAME>`` used in :keyword:`import` statements,
  * the compiler flags (CFLAGS), and
  * the linker flags (LDFLAGS).

  If the extension module may not be enabled or supported depending on the
  host configuration, use the ``PY_STDLIB_MOD`` macro instead, which takes
  as arguments:

  * the module name ``<NAME>`` used in :keyword:`import` statements,
  * a boolean indicating whether the extension is **enabled** or not,
  * a boolean indicating whether the extension is **supported** or not,
  * the compiler flags (CFLAGS), and
  * the linker flags (LDFLAGS).

  For instance, enabling the :mod:`!_foo` extension on Linux platforms, but
  only providing support for 32-bit architecture, is achieved as follows:

  .. code-block:: text
     :caption: :cpy-file:`configure.ac`
     :emphasize-lines: 2, 3

     PY_STDLIB_MOD([_foo],
                   [test "$ac_sys_system" = "Linux"],
                   [test "$ARCH_RUN_32BIT" = "true"],
                   [-I\$(srcdir)/Modules/_foo], [])

>   More generally, the status of the extension is determined as follows:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  More generally, the host's configuration status of the extension is determined as follows:
```

  +-----------+-----------------+----------+
  | Enabled   | Supported       | Status   |
  +===========+=================+==========+

>   | true      | true            | yes      |

Reviewer 6: Perhaps available instead of yes.

```suggestion
  | true      | true            | available      |
```

Author: Actually, for this one, I will to disagree as `./configure` says:

```
dnl Check for stdlib extension modules
dnl PY_STDLIB_MOD([NAME], [ENABLED-TEST], [SUPPORTED-TEST], [CFLAGS], [LDFLAGS])
dnl sets MODULE_$NAME_STATE based on PY_STDLIB_MOD_SET_NA(), ENABLED-TEST,
dnl and SUPPORTED_TEST. ENABLED-TEST and SUPPORTED-TEST default to true if
dnl empty.
dnl    n/a: marked unavailable on platform by PY_STDLIB_MOD_SET_NA()
dnl    yes: enabled and supported
dnl    missing: enabled and not supported
dnl    disabled: not enabled
``` 

and 

``` 
  AS_IF([test "$modstate" != "n/a"], [
    AS_IF([m4_ifblank([$2], [true], [$2])],
       [AS_IF([m4_ifblank([$3], [true], [$3])], [modstate=yes], [modstate=missing])],
       [modstate=disabled])
  ])
```

Reviewer 6: Sounds good. Thanks for clarifying.

       ...
     </ItemGroup>

     <!-- group with source files ..\Modules\<MODULE>.c -->
     <ItemGroup>
       ...
       <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\_foo\_foomodule.c" />
       <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\_foo\helper.c" />
       ...
     </ItemGroup>

* Update :cpy-file:`PCbuild/pythoncore.vcxproj.filters`:

  .. code-block:: xml
     :caption: :cpy-file:`PCbuild/pythoncore.vcxproj.filters`
     :emphasize-lines: 4-6, 13-18

     <!-- group with header files ..\Modules\<MODULE>.h -->
     <ItemGroup>
       ...
       <ClInclude Include="..\Modules\_foo\helper.h">
         <Filter>Modules\_foo</Filter>
       </ClInclude>
       ...
     </ItemGroup>

     <!-- group with source files ..\Modules\<MODULE>.c -->
     <ItemGroup>
       ...
       <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\_foo\_foomodule.c">
         <Filter>Modules\_foo</Filter>
       </ClCompile>
       <ClCompile Include="..\Modules\_foo\helper.c">
         <Filter>Modules\_foo</Filter>
       </ClCompile>
       ...
     <ItemGroup>

.. tip::

   Header files use ``<ClInclude>`` tags, whereas
   source files use ``<ClCompile>`` tags.

Compiling the CPython project
-----------------------------

> Now that everything is in place, it remains to compile the project:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Now that configuration is in place, it remains to compile the project:
```

.. code-block:: shell

   make regen-configure
   ./configure
   make regen-all
   make regen-stdlib-module-names
   make

.. tip::

   Use ``make -j`` to speed-up compilation by utilizing as many CPU cores
   as possible or ``make -jN`` to allow at most *N* concurrent jobs.

* ``make regen-configure`` updates the :cpy-file:`configure` script.

* ``make regen-all`` is responsible for regenerating header files and
  invoking other scripts, such as :ref:`Argument Clinic <clinic>`.
  Execute this rule if you do not know which files should be updated.

* ``make regen-stdlib-module-names`` updates the standard module names, making
  :mod:`!_foo` discoverable and importable via ``import _foo``.

* The final ``make`` step is generally not needed since the previous ``make``
  invokations may completely rebuild the project, but it could be needed in
  some specific cases.

Troubleshooting
---------------

This section addresses common issues that you may face when following

> this tutorial.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
this example of adding an extension module.
```
